# Origin and Evolution of Life - From Stability to Sentience

One question that has always perplexed me is the origin of life. There are, of course, other profound questions, such as the origin of the universe itself. However, let's assume that the Universe exists and is made up of atoms and subatomic particles, and there are forces acting between these particles through which they interact and move.

In short, the universe can be summarized as atoms, subatomic particles, and the forces acting between them. What is mind-blowing is how this could lead to life, and eventually lead to beings like us who are aware of our existence and can ask deep questions like the one we are discussing right now!

I attempt here to reason how a phenomenon like life could originate from these simple assumptions and the reasoning built on top of those assumptions.

One of the assumptions is that matter exists in the form of atoms. Atoms interact with each other through the forces of nature and can form molecules. 

We know that molecules can have complex structures. Depending on its structure, a molecule can have some very interesting properties, Its stability can vary, some tend to be more stable once formed, while others tend to be less stable.

One of the inherent properties of our world is that things that are more stable will persist for a long time without getting destroyed. The word “stable” itself implies this.

If something is more stable, it will be sustained for more time, and will be difficult for external agents to destroy it.

During the early phase of life, Earth had simple molecules. But eventually, due to natural phenomena such as volcanic activity and lightning, complex molecules began to form. Certain molecules tend to be more stable than others.

If there was a soup of different molecules, the ones that were stable ones formed tended to exist for longer periods of time. 

Now, imagine, due to some coincidence, a molecule gained the ability to create a copy of itself. 

Yes, it is indeed an extraordinary ability. But understand that we ourselves are a bunch of molecules. Molecules arranged in a specific arrangement can even lead to complex properties such as consciousness. So creating copies of itself must indeed be a practical feat.

Now, the molecule that gained this ability would start to become numerous in number.

Imagine that there are different types of these kinds of molecules, all creating copies of themselves from the surrounding simple molecules.

There must have been evolutionary pressure towards the selection of molecules that were more stable once formed.

Molecules that had the ability to create copies faster would have left behind more copies.

If the surrounding simple molecules from which the complex molecule creates copies of itself, we can imagine that competition arises between these molecules towards using these simple molecules to create the copies.

The newly formed molecules would not be perfect copies. Some would have slight changes in them. If the change enhanced their ability to create copies, it would become more abundant.

So, there would be competition among different versions of these replicator molecules, and they competed to leave behind more copies.

Note that the change for a molecule that happens in a single generation should be minimal as if the molecule changes significantly, it can no longer be grouped as the same molecule.

Now, if the change that happens in any generation leads to some significant advantages, it would lead to more copies.

For example, if a change led to the development of a protective coating around it to protect itself from interaction with some other molecule or chemical, it would offer a survival advantage.

If the change created causes a detriment in their ability to survive, and reproduce, they eventually leave behind fewer copies or go extinct.

Note that the changes that occur during copying must be something that is totally random. Sometimes it leads to advantages, sometimes disadvantages.

Eventually, these molecules started to develop more strategies, one over the other, to better their survival and reproduction chances.

These molecules are the ancestors of genes in cells.

All the complex mechanisms inside cells can be thought of as survival strategies these molecules developed to enhance survival and reproduction.

Eventually, these molecules developed cooperation strategies and started living in colonies. These colonies are now called multicellular organisms, us being one of them.

Intelligence, fear, love, sensory abilities, etc., all can be considered strategies that these molecules developed to enhance their survival and reproduction probabilities.

Life can be summarized as stable molecule configurations trying to sustain and spread through space and time.

The range of all the emotions that we experience, the extremes like overwhelming joy and profound sorrow, and all the shades in between, originated from the relentless drive of these simple molecules to survive and reproduce in a hostile and ever-changing environment!
